# 1.1 Information Technology
**Information Technology** (IT) combines hardware, software, and services people use to manage, communicate, and share information. Companies use the information to increase productivity, deliver high quality products and services, maintain customer loyalty, and make sound decisions. Information technology can mean the difference between success and failure in a competitive global economy.

More than ever, businesses success depends on information technology. It is driving a new digital economy in which hardware, software and connectivity advances can benefit businesses and individual enormously. Although economic trends affect IT spending levels, most companies prioritize IT budgets in good times or bad. The reason is simple: During periods of growth, companies must pay attention to the IT curve. Conversely, firms often use it to reduce operating costs and improve efficiency when the economy slows down.

Information technology also has profound influence on modern life. Although fictitious, the headlines in Figure 1 - One, offer dramatic examples of how it issues such as data privacy, mobile devices and social media affect our society. We live in a world where we can be traced, analyzed and surveilled without our knowledge. This raises many important questions, such as securing personal data while providing useful functionality and business value. (The following sections provide a sense of IT history, an overview of system analysis and design, a description of these systems analyst role).

# 1.1.1 The changing nature of information technology.
The history of IT is a fascinating study of human progress and achievement. We are dazzled by the latest and greatest technology, just as our parents and grandparents were astonished by the arrival of television, space flights and personal computing. However, it is vital for IT professionals who live and work in this exciting world to realize that each technological advance is part of a long term process that often brings dramatic change but never really ends. The story of IBM is a good example.

As its name suggests, International Business Machines was a major supplier of office equipment and typewriters long before the modern computer era. Herman Hollerith, who invented a card that identified the characters by the location of punch holes, founded IB MS predecessor company in 1896. A deck of hundreds or even thousands of these cards could store data that was quickly stored, queried, and printed by machines. This system sounds archaic now, but punch card technology was a huge advance that revolutionized the business world and was used in the 1960s and beyond.

Today, IBM is a global spanning company with several hundred thousand employees it has succeeded in part by constantly adapting to its changing business environment. For example, while it was once known primarily as a hardware company, IBM now makes significant revenue from software services. It also invests in its people and tries to hire the best talent available. The result is that IBM has more patents and Nobel Prize winners than any other IT company.

# 1.1.2 Systems analysis and design.
**Systems Analysis and Design** is a step by step process for developing high quality information systems. An **information system** combines technology, people and data to support business functions such as order processing, inventory control, human resources, and accounting.

Talented people, including a mix of managers, users, network administrators, web designers, programmers and system analysis, typically develop information systems capable IT. Professionals like these are always in demand, even in a slow economy. For example, notice how many positions related to IT are available in the Melbourne, Florida area as shown on Zip Recruiters job search website. There is more than 994 jobs available.

# 1.1.3 What does a Systems Analyst do?
 A **Systems analyst** is a valued member of the IT department team who helps plan, develop and maintain information systems. Therefore, analysts must be excellent communicators with strong analytical and critical thinking skills. In addition, because systems analysis transform business requirements into IT projects, they must be business savvy and technically competent and be equally comfortable with managers and programmers who sometimes have different points of view.

Most companies assign systems analysis to the IT department. But analysts also can report to a specific user area, such as marketing, sales or accounting as a member of a functional team. An analyst can better understand the group's needs and how IT supported department's mission. In addition, smaller companies often use consultants to perform system analysis work as needed. {is this a good starting point?; what does this path look like for a recent graduate in computer programming?}

On any given day, an analyst might be asked to document business processes, test hardware and software packages, design input screens, train users and planned ecommerce websites. In addition, a systems analyst may occasionally manage IT projects, including tasks, resources, schedules, and costs. The analyst conducts meetings, delivers presentations, and writes memos, reports, and documentation to keep managers and users informed. (highlight tasks they do).

# Information Systems
A system is a set of related components that produces specific results. For example, specialized system route Internet traffic, manufacture microchips, and control complex entities like the James Webb Space Telescope. Which captured an image of a star forming in the region NGC 3324 in the Karina Nebula. A mission critical system is vital to a company's operations and order processing system, for example, is mission critical because the company cannot do business without it. 
    
Every system requires input data. For example a computer receives data when the key is pressed or A menu command is selected. In an information system, **data** consists of basic facts that are the systems raw material. **Information** is data that has been transformed into valuable (who decides its valuable?: I couldn't help to think but I don't like whst my partner does or reacts to the information she gets from social media What she does with it. I feel like it's not useful to us as a relationship or as a family There's too much hate on media In division with race, gender etc; RIP CHARLIE KIRK, The best way to drown it is to fight it with love and setting an exaample, I would think, but that's another topic Couldn't help but think about this) output for users.

# 1.2.1 Hardware
Hardware consists of everything in the physical layer of the information system. For example, hardware can include servers, workstation networks, telecommunication equipment, fiber optic cables, mobile devices, scanners, digital capture devices, and other technology based on infrastructure. A large concentration of network computers working together is called a data center. As new technologies emerge, manufacturers race to market the innovations and reap the rewards.

Hardware purchasers today face a wide array of technology choices and decisions. In Nineteen Sixty Five, Gordon Moore, a co-founder of Intel, Predicted that the number of transistors on an integrated circuit chip would double approximately every 24 months. Is concept called the Moore's law has remained valid for over 50 years. Fortunately, as hardware became more powerful, it became much less expensive. However, large businesses with thousands or millions of sales transactions require company wide information systems and powerful servers, often now in the cloud (Are these really giant rooms with massive computers Can one get a tour of one of these And if so, show me how Guided me to some websites Where one could learn more)

# 1.2.2 Software
    **Software** refers to the programs that control the hardware and produce the desired information or results. Software consists of system software and application software.

 **System software** manages the hardware components, which can include a single computer or a global network with many thousands of clients. The hardware manufacturer supplies the system software or a company purchases it (So is this last sentence saying that there are hardware manufacturers that only build the hardware and then they buy the software from a vendor If this is the case, me as a programmer, then could you sell this to a manufacturer that makes hardware components, right? I being the vendor) from the vendor. System software includes the operating system security software that protects the computer from intrusion, device drivers that communicate with hardware such as printers, and utility programs that handle specific tasks such as data backup and disk managements. System software also controls dataflow, provides data security, and manages network operations. In today's interconnected business world, network software is vitally important.

**Application software** consists of programs supporting day-to-day business functions and providing users with necessary information. Examples of company-wide applications called **enterprise applications** (Help me understand a little bit more about what company wide applications are called enterprise applications. I get that they help day to day, but I need more than that) include order processing systems, payroll systems, and company communication networks. On a smaller scale, individual users can boost productivity with tools such as spreadsheets, presentation software, and database management systems. (Give me two examples on the smaller scale or individual users; Would building the PARS system fall into an application software category).

Application software includes horizontal and vertical systems. A **horizontal system** is a system, such as an inventory or a payroll application, that can be adapted for use in many different types of companies. A **vertical system** is designed to meet the unique requirements of a specific business or industry, such as an online retailer, a medical practice or an auto dealership. (give me an example. Of each. Include a link to a real website. Or software that can showcase one of each)

Most companies use a mix of software that is acquired at various times. Therefore, when planning an information system, a company must consider how a new system will interface with older systems, which are called **legacy systems**. For example, a new human resource system might need to exchange data with a legacy payroll application.

# Data
Data is the raw material that an information system transforms into useful information. For example, an information system using a relational database can store data in various locations, called tables. The system can display the specific information that user needs by linking the tables for example. A payroll system that stores data in four separate tables. Notice that the linked tables work together to supply 19 different data items. A user can display any or all data items and filter the data to its defined limits. In this example, the user requested a list of employees who live in a specific city and work more than 40 hours in the last pay. Jane Doe's name was the first to display. 

The growth of **big data** has given rise to new ways of storing, searching and managing data. Traditional relation models are still used but so called **noSQL databases** are gaining popularity due to their ability to scale to vast unstructured data sets. (Is there a difference between this and regular SQL? I learned on mySQL workbench)

# Processses
**Processes** describe the tasks and business functions that users, managers, and IT staff performed to achieve specific results. Processes are an information systems building blocks because they represent day-to-day business operations. Therefore, analysts must understand business processes and document them carefully to build a successful information system.

# People
People who have an interest in an information system are called stakeholders. **Stakeholders** include the management group responsible for the system, the users. Sometimes called the end **users**. Inside and outside the company who will interact with the system. And IT staff members, such as system analysts, programmers, and network administrators who develop and support the system.

 Each stakeholder group has a vital interest in the information system. Still, most experienced IT professionals agree that the success or failure of a system usually depend on whether it meets the needs of its users. Therefore, it is essential to understand user requirements and expectations throughout the development process.
## Case in Point 1.2: Data Breaches
 A data breach occurs when a hacker gains illegal access to a system and steals personal data such as credit card numbers or home addresses. Data breaches are becoming increasingly common, with more information stored in the cloud. Research recent news articles about large scale data breaches summarize why they occurred and suggest how they might be prevented.

# 1.3 Internet business strategies.
Systems analysts must understand the company's business operations to design successful systems. Each situation is different. For example, a retail store, a medical practice and a hotel chain all have a unique information systems requirements. As the business world changes systems, analysts can expect to work in new companies requiring innovative IT solutions.

Business today is shaped by three significant trends. Rapidly increasing globalization, technology integration for seamless information access across various devices such as laptop and smartphones, and the rapid growth of cloud based computing and software services. The immense power of the Internet is driving these trends.

Internet based commerce is called **e-commerce (Electronic commerce)**. Internet based systems involve various hardware and software designs, but a typical model is a series of web pages that provide a user interface that communicate with database management software and a web based data server. The user interacts with a system through an **app** on mobile devices, but the same back end services are accessed. As Internet based commerce grow, career opportunities for IT professionals such as web designers, database developers and systems analysts will significantly expand.

# 1.3.1 B2C (Business-to-Consumer)
Using the Internet, consumers can purchase an enormous variety of products and service online. This new shopping environment allows customers to research, compare prices and features, check availability, arrange delivery, and choose payment methods in a single, convenient session. Many companies, such as airlines, offer incentives for online transactions because web based processing costs are lower than those using traditional methods. By making flight information available online to last minute travelers, some airlines also offer special discounts on seats that might otherwise go unfilled.

**B2C (business-to-consumer)** is changing traditional business models and creating new ones. For example, a typical business model is a retail store that sells a product to a consumer. To conduct that transaction online, the company must develop an online store and deal with different marketing, advertising and profitability issues.

Some companies have found new ways to use established business models. For example, Airbnb and VRBO have transformed traditional hospitality service industry into a popular and successful way for individuals to rent their properties. Other retailers seek to enhance the online shopping experience by offering gift advisors, buying guides, how to clinics and similar features. However. In the E commerce battles, the real winners are online consumers who have more information, better choices, and the convenience of shopping at home.

# 1.3.2 B2B (Business-to-Consumer)
Although the B2C sector is more familiar to retail customers, the volume of **B2B (Business-to-business)** transactions is many times greater. Moreover, industry observes predict that B 2B sales will increase sharply as more firms seek to improve efficiency and reduce costs.

 Initially, electronic commerce between two companies used a data sharing arrangement called **Electronic Data Exchange**, also known as EDI. EDI enabled computer to computer data transfer, usually over private telecommunication lines. Firms used EDI to plant production, adjust inventory levels or stock up on raw materials using data from another companies information system. As B two B volume soared, company to....e environments anywhere and anytime 
 As B2B volume soared, company to company transactions migrated to the Internet which offered standard protocols, universal availability and low communication cost. The main advantage of the web is that it provides seamless communication between different hardware and software environments, anywhere and anytime As B2B volume soared, company to company transactions migrated to the Internet which offered standard protocols, universal availability and low communication cost. The main advantage of the web is that it provides seamless communication between different hardware and software environments, anywhere and anytime.

 Because it allows companies to reach the global marketplace, B2B is vital to smaller suppliers and customers needing instant price and availability information. In an approach that resembles an open marketplace, some B2B sites invite buyers, sellers, distributors and manufacturers to offer products, submit specifications and transact business.

 Most large firms and government agencies use **supply chain management (SCM)** software. A **supply chain** refers to all the companies that provide materials, services and functions needed to deliver products to a customer. For example, a Sherwin-Williams customer who base buys a gallon of paint, is at the end of a chain that includes the raw materials sources, packaging suppliers, manufacturers, transporters, warehouses, and retail stores. Because SCM is complex and dynamic, specialized software helps businesses manage inventory levels, cost, alternative suppliers, and much more.

# 1.3.3 C2C (Business-to-Consumer)
The covered 19 pandemic forced many consumers to buy products and services online. As a result, an entire industry of new companies quickly blossomed, selling products and services online to imagine burgeoning consumer demand. The result has been tremendous growth of **C2C (consumer to consumer)** e-commerce transactions.

An example of C2c ecommerce is the fashion industry, particularly the popularity of buying and selling used clothing. What was previously seen as the purview of second hand thrift stores rapidly morphed into an economical way of reusing valuable clothing items in an environmentally friendly marketplace. Companies such as Poshmark, Debop and Mercari are examples of successful C2c Internet. businesses.

# 1.3.1 B2C (Business-to-Consumer)


